# CTDGFinder. A comparative genomics approach to gene clusters

 
The software package is a python3 script (`ctdg_finder.py`), which runs the homology search (via HMMeR), process coordinates information, and finds clusters of gene duplicates (ctdg).  
CTDGFinder expects an annotated GFF file and a chromosomes, specified by a configuration JSON file (described above). The chromosome and annotated GFF files can be generated by the script `extras/run_hmmer.sh` (and will be explained below).  

### Installation
Before installing CTDGFinder, the following python modules should be installed:  

* numpy 
* pandas 
* HTSeq
* pybedtools (and install BedTools)
* scipy
* scikit-learn
### Running instructions
ctdgFinder is run as a python script (`python ctdg_finder.py config.json`) where `config.json` is a configuration file. All the options in the configuration file have to be specified. An example configuration file is described below:  
  
```json
{
     "gff": "path to gff annotation",
  "chroms": "path to genome file (see below for details)",
  "paths": {
              "out_dir": "directory for output (will be created if necessary)"
            },
  "feat_type": "feature type to be clustered (e.g. 'gene')",
  "top_level_feat": "feature type to be considered top-level (e.g. 'chromosome')",
  "samples": "Number of regions to be sampled in the statistical assessment (WITHOUT QUOTES)",
  "percentile_threshold": "percentile cutoff: (more details in the publication)",
  "overwrite": "true or false (without quotes): if true, existing results will be overwritten"
}
```
#### Input files
##### GFF annotation
This file is generated by the script `extras/annotate_gff.py` and by its wrapper `extras/run_hmmer.sh`. It is recommended to use the script `extras/run_hmmer.sh`.  

The Input GFF file should follow GFF basic specifications with some additions to the attributes column, as follows:
* The top-level sequences (e.g. chromosome) should have a *bandwidth* attribute. This should correspond to the average intergenic distance plus its standard deviation.
* The features to be clustered (e.g. gene) should have a *families* attribute. CTDGFinder can handle either features belonging to one family (e.g. orthologous groups), or many (domains, gene families, etc). If many gene families are to be used, they have to be separated with commas, with NO spaces.  

Example of valid GFf lines:  
```
chr1   Annotation         chromosome       1  1000000  .       +       .       ID=chr19;bandwidth=155348.4809  
chr1   Annotation         gene        107103   117102  .       +       .       ID=gene1;families=family1,family2  
chr1   Annotation         gene        202103   203012  .       +       .       ID=gene1;families=family3
```

### Sample run
The chromosomes 6 and 19 of the human genome, along with their protein sequences are included here under `sample_genome/db` to illustrate how to run CTDGFinder. The Pfam accessions PF13927.6 (Immunoglobulin domain), PF00129.18 (Class I Histocompatibility antigen, domains alpha 1 and 2), and PF18508.1 (Zinc finger domain) are concatenated in the file `sample_genome/domains/domains.hmm` as a sample domain database for the sake of a quick sample run.  

1. Generate input files. The following script will format the HMM to be used by HMMer, run the HMMer search, parse its results, and annotate a given GFF file. All the files needed to run this script are provided.
NOTE: The first argument in `run_hmmer.sh` is the feature name that will be used as "top-level" sequence. This is of interest if the GFF used for the analysis does not contain chromosome-level sequences (e.g. scaffold).

#### Arguments
* top-level sequence
* Proteome Fasta file
* HMMer HMM file with domain/gene family HMMs
* Input gene annotation (GFF)
* Output gene annotation
* Output chromosome file
* Number of CPU (For Hmmer search step)
```bash
bash extras/run_hmmer.sh chromosomes sample_genome/db/chroms19_6.fa sample_genome/domains/domains.hmm sample_genome/db/chroms19_6.gff sample_genome/db/chroms19_6_annotated.gff sample_genome/db/chromosomes.tsv 16
```
2. Edit JSON configuration file. The JSON file provided here (`config.json`) contains the data necessary to run CTDGFinder from the files generated by the command below.
3. Run CTDGFinder
```bash
python ctdg_finder.py config.json
```

#### Processing
CTDGFinder will output the progess of its run on the screen
```
Canis_familiaris   ...chr26_9: 23542658 - 23612283      D 3   P95: 0.0*
Canis_familiaris   ...chr26_10: 14264936 - 14682839     D 2   P95: 3
```
The first column is the base name of the GFF file (usually containing the species name). The second section corresponds to the coordinates of the cluster. Note that the chromosome name is followed by *\_#*, which is how each cluster is identified. The third column shows the number of duplicates, and the last column shows the percentile (in this case, the 95<sup>th</sup> percentile).  The asterisks at the left end of each line show clusters that passed the statistical assessment. As shown in the example, the second cluster "chr26_10" is rejected because it has fewer duplicates than the percentile 95<sup>th</sup> for its samples.
### Output
CTDGFinder produces two GFF files, with the raw cluster information, and with merged clusters.  
* `clusters.gff`: This GFF file contains the features that were clustered, as well as *cluster* features, which are parents to the genes in that cluster.  
```
chr19   CTDGFinder      cluster 9087059 9252625 .       .       .       ID=chr19_1;length=165566;duplicates=7;percentile=0.0;families=PTHR26451
chr19   Annotation      gene    9087060 9095669 .       +       .       ID=ENSG00000170929;families=PTHR26451;biotype=protein_coding;Parent=chr19_1;order=1
chr19   Annotation      gene    9100406 9107475 .       -       .       ID=ENSG00000170923;families=PTHR26451;biotype=protein_coding;Parent=chr19_1;order=2

```
As it can be seen, the *cluster* feature has some attributes that describe the cluster. They are:  
* **Length**: Distance from the first feature in the cluster to the last one.
* **duplicates**: Number of clustered genes in the cluster.
* **percentile**: Value of the percentile taken from the random distribution for that cluster.
* **families**: Name of the families included in the clustered genes of the cluster.  

The feature GFF lines have a *Parent* attribute that connects them to the cluster they belong to, as well as an *order* attribute that describes the position of the gene in the cluster

* `merged_clusters.gff`: This file is very similar to `clusters.gff`, except that the *cluster* features do not have a *percentile* attribute. The reason for this is that a *cluster* feature in this file can be the product of merging various clusters together. Clusters of this nature exist. For example, the globin cluster on the human chromosome 11 is embeded in a larger olfaction receptor cluster ([Bulger et al. 1999](http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.96.9.5129)). 